## The sense of an ending - by Julian Barnes  9/10

Absolutely awesome book. The ending initially kind of sucks but gets better the more you think about it.

The sense of an ending is all about a patient, philosophical approach to time, history, and this self delusion human-centric world we exist in. It starts out as 4 school boys, hanging out with one another talking philosophical talk, pondering the meaning of life and more than anything, as we all do, wishing they were grown up. As if children exist in some cage, limited by parents and school, and as soon as we graduate college all the bars vanish and we’re free to change the world, when in reality it never ends up being like that. The bars just change into financial barriers and we’re just as useless as before - yet this time it’s depressing because our hopes hinged on us actually changing the world.

The story is this wild emotional roller coaster of an old man (Tony, or Anthony, Webster) trying to find meaning in an older woman who left him one of his childhood friends diaries. It all started when 30 years prior, he had dumped his girlfriend, and she ended up going with his philosophical friend, Adrian. The girlfriend (veronica) had a kind of saucy mom. And the memories of which the main character (Tony) provides are a fragmented account of some weird situations with her mom. Tony gets pissed his ex goes out with his friend Adrian, so writes a pissed off letter to them and ceases contact.

Fast forward a year after he writes a pissed off emotional tirade to Veronica and Adrian and he gets a letter that Adrian has commit suicide. That’s all we know. No contact with veronica after, nothing.

30 years later Veronicas MOM of all people leaves Adrians (yes her daughters boyfriend who commit suicide) diary to Tony. Which is just…. odd. Tony goes on this incredible journey to uncover wtf is going on, all the while you as the reader are like WTF is happening. Why is veronica so pissed off about what happened 30 years ago.

Turns out in the end you find out that Adrian had an affair with his gf (veronica’s) mom. And in his diary, this one piece that veronica sent him, he commit suicide because he found out the mother was pregnant and he didn’t know if the baby was tony’s or his. You really drop your jaw when this comes out. He’s scared. Adrian, this philosophical buff, is scared. Just like the kid who commit suicide because he knocked up his girlfriend in middle school in the beginning of the book and all of them made fun of. Just as baseless. No maturity, pure fear. It seems Barnes point was under the onion, no philosophical jargon can detract from our similarities.

We never really grow up. We’re never as big as we say we are. Self delusion.

I also love the idea that history is written by our self delusions. Tony‘s history of events is fragmented and full of judgements and personal biases. So is veronica’s, and so is Adrians and this mother. Self grandiose and delusion. Our lives are this nonsensical series of unverifiable actions. What even is history then? As Adrian put it “History is that certainty produced at the point where the imperfections of memory meet the inadequacies of documentation”. That, and self delusions.

“In those days, we imagined ourselves as being kept in some kind of holding pen, waiting to be released into our lives. And when that moment came, our lives--and time itself--would speed up. How were we to know that our lives had in any case begun, that some advantage had already been gained, some damage already inflicted? Also, that our release would only be into a larger holding pen, whose boundaries would be at first indiscernible.” (Page 10)

“‘We could start, perhaps, with the seemingly simple question, What is History? Any thoughts, Webster?’ ‘History is the lies of the victors’, I replied, a little too quickly. ‘Yes, I was rather afraid you’d say that. Well, as long as you remember that it is also the self delusions of the defeated. Simpson?’ Colin was more prepared than me. ‘History is a raw onion sandwich, sir.’ ‘For what reason?’ ‘It just repeats, sir. It burps. We’ve seen it again and again this year. Same old story, same old oscillation between tyranny and rebellion, war and peace, prosperity and impoverishment.’ ‘Rather a lot for a sandwich to contain, wouldn’t you say?’ We laughed far more than was required, with an end-of-term hysteria. ‘Finn?’ ‘History is that certainty produced at the point where the imperfections of memory meet the inadequacies of documentation.’ ‘Is it, indeed? Where did you find that?’ ‘Lagrange, sir. Patrick Lagrange. He’s French.’ ‘So one might have guessed. Would you care to give us an example?’ ‘Robson’s suicide, sir.’ There was a perceptible intake of breath and…..” (page 19)

“I did, eventually, find myself thinking straight. That’s to say, understanding Adrian’s reasons, respecting them, and admiring him. He had a better mind and a more rigorous temperament than me; he thought logically, and then acted on the conclusion of logical thought. Whereas most of us, I suspect, do the opposite: we make an instinctive decision, then build up an infrastructure of reasoning to justify it. And call the result common sense.” (Page 57)

“Later on in life, you expect a bit of rest, don’t you? You think you deserve it. I did, anyway. But then you begin to understand that the reward of merit is not life’s business. Also, when you are young, you think you can predict the likely pains and bleakness that age might bring. You imagine yourself being lonely, divorced, widowed; children growing away from you, friends dying. You imagine the loss of status, the loss of desire--and desirability. You may go further and consider your own approaching death, which, despite what company you may muster, can only be faced alone. But all this is looking ahead. What you fail to do is look ahead, and then imagine yourself looking back from that future point. Learning the new emotions that time brings. Discovering, for example, that as the witnesses to your life diminish, there is less corroboration, and therefore less certainty, as to what you are or have been. Even if you have assiduously kept records--in words, sound, pictures-- you may find that you have attended to the wrong kind of record-keeping. What was the line Adrian used to quote? ‘History is that certainty produced at the point where the imperfections of memory meet the inadequacies of documentation.’” (page 65)

“It strikes me that this may be one of the differences between youth and age: when we are young, we invent different futures for ourselves; when we are old, we invent different passts for others.” (page 88)

“I’m sure psychologists have somewhere made a graph of intelligence measured against age. Not a graph of wisdom, pragmatism, organisational skill, tactical nous--those things which, over time, blur our understanding of the matter. BGut a graph of pure intelligence. And my guess is that it would show we most of us peak between the ages of sixteen and twenty-five. Adrian’s fragment brought me back to how he was at that age. When we had talked and argued, it was as if setting thoughts in order was what he had been designed to do, as if using his brain was as natural as an athlete using his muscles. And just as athletes often react to victory with a curious mixture of pride, disbelief and modesty--I did this, yet how did i do this? By myself? Thanks to others? Or did God do it for me?--so Adrian would take you along on the journey of his thought as if he himself didn’t quite believe the ease with which he was traveling. He had entered some state of grace--but one that did not exclude. He made you feel you were his co-thinker, even if you said nothing. And it was very strange for me to feel this again, this companionship with one now dead but still more intelligent, for all my extra decades of life. Not just pure, but also applied intelligence. I found myself comparing my life against Adrian’s. The ability to see and examine himself; the ability to make moral decisions and act on them; the mental and physical courage of his suicide. “He took his own life” is the phrase; but Adrian also took charge of his own life, he took command of it, he took it in his hands--and then out of them. How few of us--we that remain-- can say that we have done the same?” (page 96)

“I thought more often of Susie, and of the luck any parent has when a child is born with four limbs, a normal brain, and the emotional makeup that allows the child, the girl, the woman to lead any sort of life. May you be ordinary, as the poet once wished the newborn baby.” (Page 157)

“I thought of the things that had happened to me over the years, and of how little I had made happen.” (Page 157)



